Adds new page about human readable addresses (#1082)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses.md

---
layout: guide
title: Human readable addresses
description: Easy-to-use bitcoin addresses via DNS payment instructions and the lightning address protocol.
nav_order: 1
parent: Payment request formats
grand_parent: How it works
permalink: /guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/
main_classes: -no-top-padding
image: /assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/human-readable-addresses-preview.jpg

---

<!--

Editor's notes:

-->

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/human-readable-addresses.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/human-readable-addresses@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/human-readable-addresses-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/human-readable-addresses-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "The word bitcoin address written in binary and plain text"
   width = 1600
   height = 400
   layout = "full-width"
%}

# Human readable addresses

> [Bitcoin addresses]({{'/guide/glossary/address/' | relative_url}}) and [payment requests]({{'/guide/how-it-works/payment-request-formats/' | relative_url}}) are long and cryptic, and practically impossible to read, memorize, pronounce, understand, and type. Creating a separate format for human-readable addresses is a logical solution to this problem, and there have been multiple attempts at making them a reality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Bitcoin addresses]({{'/guide/glossary/address/' | relative_url}}) and [payment requests]({{'/guide/how-it-works/payment-request-formats/' | relative_url}}) are long and cryptic, practically impossible to read, memorize, pronounce, understand, or type. We are used to being able to communicate our social media handles, or email addresses easily. That expectation has also extended to transacting value, with neo-banking and payment applications. There have been multiple attempts at making human-readable addresses a reality in bitcoin.
```

The benefits to the user experience include:

- Familiarity: A format that feels more human and familiar to users
- Ease of sharing: A format that is easier to remember and recall and share in a social setting

> Note that human-readable addresses should be <b>only</b> used for direct communication. Whenever payment information is communicated digitally (copy & paste, links, QR codes, messaging, etc), regular addresses should be used for best privacy and security.

Reviewer: This would be impossible to enforce on any level and is also not how it is currently implemented. See Nostr.

Author: Sure thing. Just like address re-use, wallets can encourage best practices, but can't enforce them. That's why I wrote `should`. Or am I misunderstanding?

Reviewer: mm gotcha - well then maybe then bolden the should and add "ideally".

> On this page, we focus primarily on the [DNS Payment Instructions proposal](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/1551), with some information about [Lightning Addresses](https://lightningaddress.com). They pursue similar goals, but in very different ways.

Reviewer: We have promoted things which do not have wide adoption as yet like [Sign in with bitcoin](https://bitcoin.design/guide/how-it-works/sign-in-with-bitcoin) but here it's spoken about in the abstract instead of strong recommendation to WebLN over LNURL-Auth for example.

From my recollection this is the first time a payment protocol will be added to the guide at such an early stage, against something else which has already had adoption that it's to supplant.

Stephen created a separate campaign page for Unified QR Codes to help drive its' adoption. Will this page be the primary campaign page for the BIP?

Asking because we have been quite reserved so far, so wondering if it's a shift in our editorial policy for BDG.

Author: Good point. I'll add that this is an early proposal.

Overall, I think we can be more forward-looking, especially if it could maybe help the ecosystem figure out how to move forward. We just need the proper disclaimers.

Reviewer 2: Please note that all replies here are hinting that the forward-looking aspects are the most questionable/doubtful.

Author: Also see the [Stabilizing bitcoin value](https://bitcoin.design/guide/how-it-works/stabilizing-bitcoin-value/) which has a disclaimer about the techniques being experimental and such.

> Please note that all replies here are hinting that the forward-looking aspects are the most questionable/doubtful.

Isn't it normal and to be expected that the forward-looking aspects would be the ones that are discussed the most?

> Will this page be the primary campaign page for the BIP?

I do not know how this page will be used. There are no plans for a campaign. Matt made a proposal, this page is about how this proposal could surface in UIs.

Author: @johnsBeharry I added a note in the page about that proposal being brand new and still being discussed.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-intermediaries.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-intermediaries@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-intermediaries-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-intermediaries-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Diagram showing the parties involved in communicating payment information"
   width = 800
   height = 165
%}

In a similar vein, [UMA](https://www.uma.me) is based on LNURL and Lightning Address, with modified functionality and the *"$<span class="-green">alice</span>@<span class="-blue">domain.com</span>"* address format. The *$* prefix was chosen to represent both fiat and crypto currencies.

## [Paynyms](http://paynym.is)

> This approach relies on a centralized directory/server and [BIP-47](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0047.mediawiki) payment codes. Centralization allows for the omission of the global part and users can simply be referred to by their usernames. However, it is not recommended due to the problematic centralization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach relies on a single directory provider which maps a human readable name with a [BIP-47](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0047.mediawiki) payment code. Having a single provider allows for the omission of the global part, in this case "my.paynym.is/username" and users can simply be referred to by their usernames. However, it is not recommended due to the problematic centralization.
```

### The basic idea

Bitcoin transactions always rely on long and cryptic addresses and payment formats, consisting of numbers and letters. Human-readable addresses are a means for wallets to retrieve these regular addresses. In other words they act as pointers.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/mapping.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/mapping@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/mapping-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/mapping-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Diagram showing an email address pointing to a bitcoin address"
   width = 800
   height = 141
%}

There are various technical approaches to resolve addresses. We’ll learn more about the different benefits and drawbacks below.

### Security & privacy

Every approach requires at least one intermediary that is being contacted to serve the payment information.

> This brings up important questions around privacy and security. Intermediaries can potentially serve up different payment information than a user specified. Or they can track requests and metadata to build profiles of users and user behavior. If these intermediate hops are not fully controlled by the user, the address should be considered custodial (or at least semi-custodial).

Author: Maybe the problem is that we are so used to the term "custodial" being used for the funds themselves - who controls the key - and now we use it for addresses with very different context. Not sure how to resolve this other than using a different term. What do you think?

Generally, I find the paragraph clear as a whole, even if the specific term could be off.

> This brings up important questions around privacy and security. Intermediaries can potentially serve up different payment information than a user specified. Or they can track requests and metadata to build profiles of users and user behavior. If these intermediate hops are not fully controlled by the user, the address should be considered custodial (or at least semi-custodial).

Author: I clarified the text a bit further, describing what is meant by custodial here. Hope that addresses your feedback.

## DNS Payment Instructions

This [proposal](https://github.com/BitcoinDesign/Meta/issues/638) only relies on the Domain Name System (DNS) to retrieve payment information. It is a decentralized hierarchical naming system used to translate human-friendly domain names (like *www.example.com*) into IP addresses (like *192.0.2.1*) that computers use to identify each other on the network. Anytime we type in a domain into a browser, we rely on this system.

{% include tip/open.html color="blue" label="Note" icon="info" %}

This is a new proposal for a [BIP]({{'/guide/glossary/#bip---bitcoin-improvement-proposal' | relative_url}}). It is still being discussed.

{% include tip/close.html %}

### Address format

This proposal uses the format *“₿<span class="-green">username</span>@<span class="-blue">domain.com</span>”*. This is similar to email, which makes it familiar and easy to use. The *₿* prefix is an important addition to make it distinct from email addresses as a bitcoin payment address. This provides clarity and trust to users, which is important when it comes to financial transactions.

### How it works

> Users create DNS entries with payment information, which can be one or more addresses of different formats, combined to a [BIP 21 URIs](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0021.mediawiki). Since address reuse is best avoided for privacy reasons, the included addresses should only be static payment codes (like [silent payment codes](https://gist.github.com/RubenSomsen/c43b79517e7cb701ebf77eec6dbb46b8) and [BOLT12](https://bolt12.org/) offers).

Author: I think I read that, and then someone else said that DNS propagation is not speedy and trustworthy enough to make it super reliable. No particular thoughts on this, other than recommending to stick with BOLT12 and silent payments.

🤷

   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-mapping-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-mapping-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Diagram showing how a bitcoin address is resolved to a payment URL"
   width = 800
   height = 221
%}

Wallets look up the payment information when first exposed to a human-readable address. Then they rely on the retrieved information to initiate transactions.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-intermediaries.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-intermediaries@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-intermediaries-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-intermediaries-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Diagram showing how the involved parties interact with each other"
   width = 800
   height = 357
%}

### Trust

> Setting this up requires a user to own a domain, and trust the domain provider and DNS system to truthfully communicate their payment information. If the user does not own the domain but uses a third-party service instead, then another intermediary is in play.

Author: I think we're reading this paragraph very differently.

> "setting this up requires a user to own a domain"

If you want to set this up yourself, you need to own a domain.

> If the user does not own the domain but uses a third-party service instead

If you don't have a domain, you can use a third-party.

> then another intermediary is in play

That third-party is an extra intermediary that you don't have if you own the domain. That changes the trust assumption (from "registrar + DNS" to "third-party + registrar + DNS").

Looking at Nostr, there is a difference getting my NIP-05 address via [nostrplebs.com](https://nostrplebs.com/) or through an address I have registered myself.

So I think we're mostly on the same page here, but just reading/interpreting things differently. What do you think?

   alt-text = "Diagram showing who the user trusts when owning a domain, or hosting their address with a third party"
   width = 800
   height = 383
%}

### Design patterns

#### Educating users

Framing the correct use of the address should be done right away and as early in the user flow as possible. This allows them to make informed decisions as to how and when to use it. Users should be informed that:

- The purpose of the address is for verbally sharing their bitcoin address in a social setting.
- That the address is public, which carries a clear directional understanding about privacy.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/education.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/education@2x.jpg"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/education-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/education-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "UI mock-up of a feature intro screen presenting bitcoin addresses for verbal communication"
   width = 800
   height = 608
%}

#### Setup

> Hosting human-readable addresses carries legal and financial responsibility, so many non-custodial wallets are unlikely to offer this feature. However, they should still make it easy to copy payment information for setting up addresses on domains owned by the user or a third party of their choice.

Author: I was thinking more about the service needing to run servers and databases to handle the user data, probably some form of login, etc. Not like Bitcoin Core, for example, where it's a standalone piece of software you run locally and don't get any other service. So the wallet provider would need to be a company and everything that comes with it. Does that make sense?

> Hosting human-readable addresses carries legal and financial responsibility, so many non-custodial wallets are unlikely to offer this feature. However, they should still make it easy to copy payment information for setting up addresses on domains owned by the user or a third party of their choice.

Reviewer 3: Sure, it's something we consider are considering with [TwelveCash](https://twelve.cash/) (how do we best handle users editing data). However, I disagree with the statement "so many non-custodial wallets are unlikely to offer this feature".

You can facilitate *pushing the user's offer to your DNS records* without taking *custody of the user's funds*. That aspect is pretty trivial. In fact, it's arguable that many non-custodial wallets would want to use this as a selling point (that you can have a cool username and be self-custodial).

> Hosting human-readable addresses carries legal and financial responsibility, so many non-custodial wallets are unlikely to offer this feature. However, they should still make it easy to copy payment information for setting up addresses on domains owned by the user or a third party of their choice.

Reviewer 3: > So the wallet provider would need to be a company and everything that comes with it.

Being a company does not equal being custodial

> Hosting human-readable addresses carries legal and financial responsibility, so many non-custodial wallets are unlikely to offer this feature. However, they should still make it easy to copy payment information for setting up addresses on domains owned by the user or a third party of their choice.

Author: I am not thinking of custody of funds, just custody of the address.

Let's imagine you create your address with some anon service online. After an initial period where everything works well, they start occasionally swapping out your actual payment info with someone else's. Or maybe they sell the domain or service to someone else, who starts messing things up. Or maybe they beef up prices and threaten to just relay your payment info to your own if you don't pay up. Or they get hacked and someone replaces the info right before your monthly paycheck comes in and you don't find out until later. If the service simply stops working and addresses break, then it's not so bad. But other scenarios could also happen.

So I think there is a responsibility that comes with owning the relay of this one piece of information to another piece of information. This is not the case when you share your BOLT12 or silent payments addresses directly. Would Sparrow Wallet or a similar project want this responsibility? Without being a company and having the required legal protection?

In the progressive security sense, there are maybe two realities. In a "Nostr zap via Lightning Address" world of tiny payments and small amounts, maybe it's fine to just be more relaxed. But with meaningful funds and use, then it's a different story. `Mo' money, mo' security`, if you will.

> Hosting human-readable addresses carries legal and financial responsibility, so many non-custodial wallets are unlikely to offer this feature. However, they should still make it easy to copy payment information for setting up addresses on domains owned by the user or a third party of their choice.

Author: Also, TwelveCash looks cool.

> Hosting human-readable addresses carries legal and financial responsibility, so many non-custodial wallets are unlikely to offer this feature. However, they should still make it easy to copy payment information for setting up addresses on domains owned by the user or a third party of their choice.

Author: I lightened the text a bit more on this responsibility aspect, hope that addresses the feedback.

   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/update-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/update-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Two modals notifying the user of changed and disabled bitcoin addresses"
   width = 800
   height = 277
%}

## Lightning Address

Compared to DNS Payment Instructions, [Lightning Addresses](http://lightningaddress.com) are focused on the lightning network only, bringing another intermediary into play, allowing for much more dynamic functionality.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-mapping.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-mapping@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-mapping-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-mapping-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Diagram showing how a lightning address is transformed to a URL"
   width = 800
   height = 157
%}

### How it works

> Lightning addresses look like traditional emails. Under the hood, a wallet that uses a lightning address reformats it to a URL. It then looks for information about a [LNURL](https://github.com/lnurl/luds) web-server at that location (more on that [here](https://github.com/lnurl/luds/blob/luds/16.md)). That server handles the communication with the lightning node and passes messages back and forth. This allows for complex interactions (like authentication and withdrawals), but also adds technical overhead and requires trusting the web server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Lightning addresses look like traditional emails. Under the hood, a wallet that uses a lightning address reformats it to a URL. It then looks for information about a [LNURL](https://github.com/lnurl/luds) web-server at that location (more on that [here](https://github.com/lnurl/luds/blob/luds/16.md)). That server handles the communication with the lightning node and passes messages back and forth. This allows for complex interactions (like authentication and withdrawals), but also requires trusting the web server.
```

While I absolutely love the DNS payment instructions, to be completely fair, it also requires technical overhead to implement. So I don't think it's accurate or fair to characterize Lightning address as "this adds technical overhead".

   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/human-readable-addresses-mobile.jpg"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/human-readable-addresses-mobile@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "The word bitcoin address written in binary and plain text"
   width = 1600
   height = 400
   layout = "full-width"
%}

# Human readable addresses
{:.no_toc}
---

<div class="glossary-toc" markdown="1">
* Table of contents
{:toc}
</div>

---

[Bitcoin addresses]({{'/guide/glossary/address/' | relative_url}}) and [payment requests]({{'/guide/how-it-works/payment-request-formats/' | relative_url}}) are long and cryptic, practically impossible to read, memorize, pronounce, understand, or type. We are used to being able to communicate our social media handles and email addresses easily. That expectation has also extended to transacting with neo-banking and payment applications. There have been multiple attempts at making human-readable addresses a reality in bitcoin.

The benefits to the user experience include:

- Familiarity: A format that feels more human and familiar to users

> - Ease of sharing: A format that is easier to remember and recall and share in a social setting

Author: How about `in-person`?

> **Important:** Human-readable addresses should only be used for direct communication. Whenever payment information is communicated digitally (copy & paste, links, QR codes, messaging, etc), cryptographic formats should be used for the best security and privacy.

Author: I disagree. Two points to this. First, wallets can copy the underlying payment info and not the human-readable address, so there are things wallets can do. And second, a lot of best practices are up to individuals to implement and cannot (or should not) be enforced. If some people don't follow them, that does not make them irrelevant (eating healthy is still a good idea if someone does not).

> **Important:** Human-readable addresses should only be used for direct communication. Whenever payment information is communicated digitally (copy & paste, links, QR codes, messaging, etc), cryptographic formats should be used for the best security and privacy.

Reviewer 4: > I disagree. Two points to this. First, wallets can copy the underlying payment info and not the human-readable address, so there are things wallets can do. 

Since these addresses would be easy to remember, recall and share (as above line mentions), the user is likely to simply type it into chat/email/social media.

> And second, a lot of best practices are up to individuals to implement and cannot (or should not) be enforced. If some people don't follow them, that does not make them irrelevant (eating healthy is still a good idea if someone does not).

Fair point, but as you mention these addresses are **meant** to be shared widely and assumed to be public, so such a suggestion counter-signals the very idea. The fact is that this is not a security/privacy-friendly payment method. 

Thus, instead of this 'important note' for the audience of the guide, a better approach might be to recommend that a warning/disclaimer/note be shown to the end-user regarding the privacy/security lacunas involved (you already mention these on this page later)

> **Important:** Human-readable addresses should only be used for direct communication. Whenever payment information is communicated digitally (copy & paste, links, QR codes, messaging, etc), cryptographic formats should be used for the best security and privacy.

Reviewer 4: Added the above suggestion as a Tip in the Security & privacy section [here](https://github.com/BitcoinDesign/Guide/pull/1082#discussion_r1911313625)

> **Important:** Human-readable addresses should only be used for direct communication. Whenever payment information is communicated digitally (copy & paste, links, QR codes, messaging, etc), cryptographic formats should be used for the best security and privacy.

Author: Going to resolve this comment, since you moved the suggestion to another comment, and I'll respond there.

   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/mapping-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Diagram showing an email address pointing to a bitcoin address"
   width = 800
   height = 159
%}

There are various technical approaches to resolve addresses. We’ll learn more about the different benefits and drawbacks below.

### Security & privacy

Every approach requires at least one intermediary that is being contacted to serve the payment information. This creates potential privacy and security risks that users need to understand.

Key considerations:

- Intermediaries can track requests and metadata to build profiles of users and payment patterns
- DNS queries may leak information about payment relationships
- Services can potentially serve different payment information than specified

If the domain (website) where the payment information is stored, is not controlled by the user, we will refer to the address as "_managed_". To be clear, intermediaries cannot move funds at the user-provided address. They can only prevent payment information retrieval, or re-route funds by returning different payment information.

> 

Reviewer 4: Providing this as an alternative to the "important note" earlier in the page, mentioned in [this comment thread](https://github.com/BitcoinDesign/Guide/pull/1082/files#r1911263474)

```suggestion
{% include tip/open.html color="blue" label="Tip" icon="info" %}

Inform the user that there is a privacy & security trade-off involved in setting up a managed address. If the application supports a user-provided domain, explain that this method minimises the risk and help them set it up with detailed instructions.

{% include tip/close.html %}

```

Author: Hm, so I am not sure it is the wallet's responsibility to provide instructions for setting things up in third-party domain registrars. Maybe a link out to a website with more info could be an option? This might be good to have either way for users to learn a bit more about the feature before they decide whether to use it.

But the way I thought about this is that the user can skip setup of the Bubble Wallet address and just enter their own human-readable address in [their own profile in contacts](https://bitcoin.design/guide/daily-spending-wallet/contacts/#a-contact-card-for-the-wallet-owner). If this address is meant to be communicated verbally, then there's not a huge benefit of having it stored in your wallet (maybe so you don't forget it).

Reviewer 4: Why not? That way they don't even have to support BIP-353 themselves, but if they do it serves as a cool feature. Since the TXT record on the domain have to contain all the payment info (bolt-12 and/or silent payments addresses etc.) potentially provided by the wallet using the BIP-21 format (see [Phoenix instructions to BTCSessions](https://x.com/phoenixwallet/status/1811455293886255602)), it seems prudent to have this. Having a third-party generate/provide these might be risky...what do you think?

Author: My point still stands:

> Maybe a link out to a website with more info could be an option? This might be good to have either way for users to learn a bit more about the feature before they decide whether to use it.

{% include tip/open.html color="blue" label="Note" icon="info" %}

This is a new proposal. It is still being discussed, and not widely implemented.

{% include tip/close.html %}

### Address format

This proposal uses the formats *“<span class="-green">username</span>@<span class="-blue">domain.com</span>”* and *“₿<span class="-green">username</span>@<span class="-blue">domain.com</span>”*. It is similar to the email address format, which makes it familiar and easy to use. The *₿* prefix is an important addition for display purposes, to make it distinctly a bitcoin payment address. This provides clarity and trust to users, which is important when it comes to financial transactions.

### How it works

> Users create DNS entries with payment information, which can be one or more addresses of different formats, combined to a [BIP 21 URI](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0021.mediawiki). Since address reuse is best avoided for privacy reasons, the included addresses should be reusable (like [silent payments]({{ '/guide/how-it-works/silent-payments/' | relative_url }}) and [BOLT12](https://bolt12.org/) offers). Single-use addresses can be used if needed, but a mechanism to rotate them should be in place.

Reviewer 5: How does a user create a DNS entry? What does that mean? Do they do that in their bitcoin wallet? Or is that something they do with the on their website domain via DNS settings? Some more detail would help me understand this.

Author: This manual setup is something they would do with their domain name registrar. Typically looks something [like this](https://help.one.com/hc/en-us/articles/360000825478-How-do-I-create-a-TXT-record). It's something for the more technical crowed that is comfortable owning and managing domains.

   width = 800
   height = 192
%}

If the user does not own the domain but uses a third-party service instead, then another intermediary is in play.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-trust-service.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-trust-service@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-trust-service-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/dns-payment-instructions-trust-service-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Diagram showing who the user trusts when hosting their address with a third party."
   width = 800
   height = 192
%}

### Design patterns

#### Educating users

Framing the correct use of the address should be done right away and as early in the user flow as possible. This allows user to make informed decisions as to how and when to use the address. The information should include:

- The purpose of the address is for verbally sharing their bitcoin address in a social setting.

> - That the address is public, which carries a clear directional understanding about privacy.

Reviewer 5: I like the idea of making the comparison to an email address.

   caption = "Introduction of the feature in an imaginary application called Bubble Wallet."
   width = 800
   height = 608
%}

#### Naming

_Human-readable address_ is an appropriate descriptive term for this proposal and technical discussion, but not necessarily practical for end-users. Due to the similarities to the familiar email format and social media practices, we can borrow from these standards.

- We can generally refer to a human-readable address as (a new type of) _bitcoin address_
- If it is provided and managed by a third-party, the product name can be used (.e.g _Bubble address_ or _Bubble bitcoin address_ as in the example above)
- The first part of the address can be referred to as _username_ (see the setup section below)

#### Managed address setup

It is important to provide users with a simple setup experience for human-readable addresses. They are likely to use them for a long time, and need to be able to trust that everything is set up and working correctly.

Below is a sample flow, in which a user can define their unique username, which is then combined with the wallet providers domain to form their human-readable address.

> {% include image-gallery.html pages = page.images_setup %}

Reviewer 4: My sense is: This user flow only sets up the username. If the payment information is automatically added by the application, it should be shown to the user as confirmation or it should be mentioned. If the user is expected to configure it further, that should be indicated as well... what do you think @GBKS ?

Author: Goal of this design was to provide a simple happy path, but allow for customization if a user is interested in that (but it is not expected of the user).

I don't think we need to show the payment info. Would a user understand what they are looking at when they see a BOLT 12 offer? Could they even catch an error if there is one? Instead, maybe an additional info screen with some explainers could be helpful?

Reviewer 5: I think the onboarding screens are fine, in the example below it shows the options for primary and backup which are clear to me.

Address settings allow users to adjust the payment information associated with the human-readable address.

> {% include image-gallery.html pages = page.images_settings %}

Reviewer 4: This is great! 💯

Wallets should also verify any addresses the user defines. For example, a user who tries to add a regular onchain address can be informed that this is a bad practice due to the privacy implications.

The additional configuration is important, to account for the diversity of features that different wallets offer. There are likely to be situations where the user wants to bundle payment information from several wallets. The best candidates for address types to use (due to their re-usability) are BOLT12 offers and silent payment addresses. Those are not broadly established, so a user may rely on different wallets for each type.

> #### Sharing

Reviewer 4: This is great advice. It also fits very well with contacts, we should mention it here and link to the guidance on Contacts!

#### Keeping users informed

The payment information associated with addresses in contacts may change or even become invalid. Wallets should ensure to inform the user of updates to review or act on. This is best done at the time the user wants to initiate a payment to a contact.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/update.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/update@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/update-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/update-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Two modals notifying the user of changed and disabled bitcoin addresses"
   width = 800
   height = 277
%}

Wallets should gracefully handle various failure modes, and provide clear error messages that help users understand and resolve issues. For example:

- DNS resolution failures
- Invalid or missing payment information
- Expired payment information
- Network connectivity issues

## Lightning Address

> Compared to DNS Payment Instructions, [Lightning Addresses](http://lightningaddress.com) are focused on the lightning network only. They bring another intermediary into play, and allow for much more dynamic functionality.

Reviewer 4: > They bring another intermediary into play, and allow for much more dynamic functionality.

- which another intermediary? (just for my knowledge)
- what more dynamic functionality? (perhaps we can mention it?)

Author: Both things are explained in the following paragraph.

   width = 800
   height = 208
%}

### How it works

Lightning addresses look like traditional emails. Under the hood, a wallet that uses a lightning address reformats it to a URL. It then looks for information about a [LNURL](https://github.com/lnurl/luds) web-server at that location (more on that [here](https://github.com/lnurl/luds/blob/luds/16.md)). That server handles the communication with the lightning node and passes messages back and forth. This allows for complex interactions (like authentication and withdrawals), but also requires trusting the web server.

{% include picture.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-intermediaries.png"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-intermediaries@2x.png"
   mobile = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-intermediaries-mobile.png"
   mobileRetina = "/assets/images/guide/how-it-works/human-readable-addresses/lightning-address-intermediaries-mobile@2x.png"
   alt-text = "Diagram showing the parties involved in communicating payment information"
   width = 800
   height = 159
%}

> In a similar vein, [UMA](https://www.uma.me) is based on LNURL and Lightning Address, with modified functionality and the *"$<span class="-green">alice</span>@<span class="-blue">domain.com</span>"* address format. The *$* prefix was chosen to represent both fiat and crypto currencies.

Reviewer 4: I oppose mentioning UMA since it amounts to promoting it. It supports shitcoinery, compliance garbage, is connected to threat actors, and is generally bad IMO. Perhaps somebody can articulate the criticism better...

## [Paynyms](http://paynym.is)

> This approach relies on a single directory provider, which maps a human readable name with a [BIP-47](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0047.mediawiki) payment code. Having a single provider allows for the omission of the global part, in this case *"my.paynym.is/<span class="-green">username</span>"* and users can simply be referred to by their usernames. The directory code is not open-source.

Reviewer 4: Perhaps it is unwise to mention it if it's open-source? If we're mentioning non-open-source stuff, might be a good idea to mention Proton's "bitcoin via email" as well.
